---
title: "Contract testing between frontend and API"
description: "Contract testing between backend and frontend with OpenAPI"
pubDate: "Jan 24 2023"
timeToReadMins: 3
heroImage: "/blog/contract-testing/hero.png"
tags:
    - Testing
---

When I joined Healios we started exploring how we might decompose a large Ruby
on Rails monolith. We wanted to move the view layer entirely into a modern
frontend tech stack using multiple [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/) applications.
We also wanted to migrate the backend into a service orientated architecture,
built partially with Rails API but also introducing Python as an additional
language. These various services would run on AWS ECS / Fargate and be
accessible via an API gateway.

One of the main concerns we wanted to address is how we can be confident that
changes we make to our API won't accidentally break our frontend(s).

One option here is to spin everything up in CI and run end to end tests on your
entire API and frontend apps. This gets increasingly more complex and time
consuming to manage as the backend is decomposed into services. It also becomes
increasing difficult to debug where issues are coming from, and bugs in backend
services can block the frontend CI pipeline.

Another option would be to implement a bells and whistles contract testing
solution, [Pact](https://pact.io/) is the obvious choice here. However Pact
involves writing a specific suite of contract tests (with a maintenance
overhead). While we're splitting up our backend, we're not taking a
microservices approach and the count of services would probably stay in the
single digits for at least the next couple of years.

Ultimately Pact felt over-engineered so we settled with a simplistic approach,
designed to allow each repo be tested in (almost) isolation while still giving a
significant level of confidence.

## Using OpenAPI

Our approach uses our API documentation as a source of truth. The docs are
written in [OpenAPI](https://www.openapis.org/) specification, which gives
access to a large suite of [OSS tools](https://openapi.tools/). One of these
tools [Prism](https://stoplight.io/open-source/prism) allows us to create a mock
API from our API docs. This is used to run all frontend tests against and can
also be used for development too. You can point the mock server either to a
locally running instance of the API docs, or to the hosted version on a staging
or production environment.

![Contract testing between repos diagram](/blog/contract-testing/repos.png)

Changes to the API documentation are protected with
[GitHub CODEOWNERS](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/customizing-your-repository/about-code-owners)
and need explicit approval from the `API Consumers` team.

## Design first approach

One of the big advantages of this workflow is it encourages and simplifies an
[API Design First](https://medium.com/@chamaral/what-is-api-design-first-approach-draft-ee14ae1369c4)
workflow. This allows frontend and backend engineers to collaborate on designing
how an API should work, creating the documentation first as a contract. They can
then make progress on the separate implementations without blocking
dependencies. It also gives high likelihood that integrating backend and
frontend will be a seamless experience.

![API Design first workflow diagram](/blog/contract-testing/design-first.png)

## Further safety in production

We also setup [Zod](https://zod.dev/) in production to validate all our API
responses are the shape and type that is expected. Any non-conformities are then
reported in realtime to [Sentry](https://sentry.io). Zod also has fantastic
TypeScript inference from the it's schemas, giving confidence that all our data
is typed correctly.

![Validating API responses in production with Zod](/blog/contract-testing/zod.png)

## So far, so good

We've been using this approach for the past 9 months and so far it's been very
smooth with a really low maintenance cost. There's only been a single issue that
made it as far as a Zod error and Sentry exception, this was a field that was a
`string` but could be `null` under specific and rare circumstances... the
observability here was really helpful and allowed for a quick and simple debug
and fix.
